If they're in an unsafe place, they know that. They don't want to put
their children at risk, but how do we keep them involved in their children's
lives? Because if we don't, their children are going to be looking for
them in the downtown Eastside in 20 years and end up down here
themselves. So the mandate for Sheways provides low barrier care to women
from a harm reduction, trauma informed, culturally safe viewpoint.
The women have used substances and are pregnant and are parenting,
living in the downtown Eastside or in Vancouver and frequenting in the downtown
Eastside. We provide services until they are at a place where they can
move on and access other services, usually around the time when a child
is three years old. We provide as much care as possible under one
roof so they don't get lost between systems. Approximately 70% of our clients
self identify as Indigenous. I think that a lot of our clients,
when trying to access care, come in contact with people that have no
or very little experience treating people who use substances with respect
and that can be a huge barrier for people to continue to engage
in care. Most of the women that I've worked with over the last
27 years have loved their children and they've cared for their children
and their children want to be involved with them.
We need to look as a society in a different way of how
to support that. For instance, sometimes we'll have a pregnant woman who
we only have one or two chances to get to the hospital for
an ultrasound and if their experience there isn't good, they may leave before
their ultrasound is done or they may never engage in care again. Many
of the women that we see that identify as Indigenous are here because
they are over represented in so many of the
stigmatized parts of our society. They're over represented in poverty and
the broader determinants of health. They're much more likely to be involved
in negative experiences. They often haven't been raised by their family
members and so have experienced a lot of
damage through the different systems of care that they've accessed whether
that be child welfare or medical systems. It's not uncommon for many of
our clients to not know who their family members are.
A lot of what their journey and healing encompasses has included re engaging
with cultural practices and traditional healing, becoming proud of who they
are and not ashamed. I think a lot of our clients have had
negative experiences in the past engaging in health care or social services.
So I think oftentimes when we come into their lives there can be
a lot of resistance. And I think that
as health care professionals the onus is on us to build that relationship
and to not take those things personally. For instance, in my practice I've
actually found that when someone tells you to f off, that's a huge
opportunity to build a relationship and to address
how that person actually wants to be approached.
And I think some of the best relationships I've actually built with some
of the clients that I have the best relationships with were after
they told me to f off and we turned that around and had
a really good conversation about what they actually
want from us and for their care.